# Demo: countdown 3-2-1-go 

This 3-2-1-go countdown is a simple demostration of the `await sleep(ms)` and a `:sleeps_seconds` reaction rule in DoubleDots. This demonstration will also explain how reaction rules can unify a series of parallel reaction rules.

## 1. HTML Setup

The demo consists of a `<div>` that begins with the text "Click me to start". When you `click` on this `div`, the idea is that this will trigger a countdown that will change the text of the element to "3", then "2", then "1", and finally "go", with a one-second pause between each update.

```html
<div>Click me to start</div>
```

## 2. Adding reactions

```html
<div click::inner_3:sleeps_1:inner_2:sleeps_1:inner_1:sleeps_1:inner_go>Click me to start</div>
```

The reaction chain is broken down in the following sequence:
1. It begins with the `click:` trigger.
2. Then, the empty `::` "async reaction" will allow the remainder of the reaction chain to run as a thread and not block the event loop.
2. Then, the `:inner_3` reaction will *change* the `.innerText` of the element to `3`.
3. Then, the `:sleeps_1` reaction will cause the execution of the rest of the reaction chain to pause for one second. Because we in step 2 above added the async reaction `::`, this pause will happen "on the side of the timeline of the rest of the application", allowing all user events and other actions to run while this reaction chain pauses.
4. Then, after a second, the `:inner_2` will again change the `.innerText` to `2`.
5. Then, a new `:sleeps_1` trigger yet another pause.

* And so on, until the reaction chain ends with the `.innerText` being replaced with `go`.

## 3. Defining *simple* reactions

Next, we define the simple custom reactions we need:

```js
customReactions.define('inner_3', function() {
    this.ownerElement.innerText = "3";
});
customReactions.define('inner_2', function() {
    this.ownerElement.innerText = "2";
});
customReactions.define('inner_1', function() {
    this.ownerElement.innerText = "1";
});
customReactions.define('inner_go', function() {
    this.ownerElement.innerText = "Go!";
});
customReactions.define('sleeps_1', async function() {
    await sleep(1000);
});
```

## 3. Defining *reusable* reaction rules

The `inner_` definitions are highly repetitive, and we can also imagine us using the `sleeps_` with other input values than `1`. To simplify these reactions and make them more reusable, we instead define them as reaction rules.
```js
customReactions.defineRule('inner_', function(fullname) {
  const text = fullname.split("_")[1];
  return function(e, oi) {
    this.ownerElement.innerText = text;
    return oi;
  };
});
customReactions.defineRule('sleeps_', function(fullname) {
  let sec = fullname.split("_")[1];
  if(isNaN)
    throw new SyntaxError(":sleeps_'x' only accepts numbers as its 'x' argument.");
  sec = Number(sec);
  return async function(e, oi) {
    await sleep(sec*1000);
    return oi;
  };
});
```

1. The `:inner_` now accepts many simple `/[a-z0-9\.-]*/` textual inputs, fullfilling the simple needs of this demo. 
2. The reaction rules handles both the `e` and `oi` arguments, and `return oi`. This is a useful pattern: **unless you explicitly want to return a specific `oi` output in a :reaction, you always let the `oi` input pass through as output to the next reaction**. This is especially important in reaction rules (as they are intended for reuse and portability).
3. The higher-order function in the `:sleeps` reaction rule does 1) an argument check and 2) argument parsing. If you can, do this argument parsing and verification in the higher order function (the rule), not the returned function (the outputted reaction). This will ensure speedier notification from the system about a knowable bug, and it will produce more efficient :reaction functions. (The rule only runs one time per identical reaction text, whereas the reaction function itself runs every time the reaction is triggered). 

## 4. Why `sleep` and not `setTimeout`?

`setTimeout` adds a new task to the native event loop. This is not what we want in DoubleDots. In DoubleDots we want the process to continue seemlessly within the :reaction we are in. The `async sleep()` pattern does this.

The reason `setTimeout` is deprecated is: 
1. When a callback is sent to `setTimeout`, the browser will run the callback in a new, separate frame (macro task).
2. This macro-task is not simple for the virtual event loop to intercept.
3. But if we instead `await sleep(10)` inside a `trigger:` or a `:reaction`, then the virtual event loop can control this async behavior in the same way as all the other async functions in the browser.